Message-Tracing with Stream-Processor guide (#1)
ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor: README.md

>   [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Shairam/message-tracing-with-stream-processor.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Shairam/message-tracing-with-stream-processor)

Reviewer: We should point to ballerina-guides org

  
## Integration with WSO2 Stream Processor

WSO2 stream processor provides us with distributed message tracing. The Distributed Message Tracer allows you to trace the events which are produced while ballerina services serve for requests. The ballerina services send these tracing data as WSO2 events.
 
The following are the sections available in this guide.

- [What you'll build](#what-you’ll-build)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Testing with distributed message tracing](#testing-with-distributed-message-tracer.)
     - [Traces](#views-of-traces)
     

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need this many newlines?

## Implementation

> If you want to skip the basics, you can download the GitHub repo and continue from the "Testing" section.

### Implementing database
 - Start MYSQL server in your local machine.
 - Create a database with name `testdb` in your MYSQL localhost. If you want to skip the database implementation, then directly import the [testdb.sql](https://github.com/Shairam/ballerina-sp-tracing/blob/master/resources/testdb.sql) file into your localhost. You can find it in the Github repo.
 
 
 

### Create the project structure
        
 For the purpose of this guide, let's use the following package structure.
        
    
    ballerina-sp-tracing
           └── guide
                ├── students
                │   ├── student_management_service.bal
                │   ├── student_marks_management_service.bal
                ├── client_service
                |         └── client_main.bal
                └── ballerina.conf
        

- Create the above directories in your local machine, along with the empty `.bal` files.

- You have to add the following lines in your [ballerina.conf](https://github.com/Shairam/ballerina-sp-tracing/blob/master/ballerina.conf).

> ```ballerina

Reviewer: This is not ballerina. Should be yaml

reporter.wso2sp.publisher.authUrl="ssl://localhost:7711"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.databridge.agent.config="<SET ABSOLUTE PATH>/data.agent.config.yaml"
javax.net.ssl.trustStore="<SET ABSOLUTE PATH>/wso2carbon.jks"
javax.net.ssl.trustStorePassword="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.service.name="ballerina_hello_world"
```
- In the ballerina.conf file for line number 11 and 12, you are required to give the appropriate absolute path to the following files mentioned in the lines.
- You can find these files [here](https://github.com/Shairam/ballerina-sp-tracing/tree/extras-1/resources/main/resources).
- Also you need to update the [data.agent.config.yaml](https://github.com/Shairam/ballerina-sp-tracing/blob/extras-1/resources/main/resources/data.agent.config.yaml) file by including the absolute path of the [required files](https://github.com/Shairam/ballerina-sp-tracing/tree/extras-1/resources/main/resources) in the following fields. 
  - trustStorePath, keystoreLocation, secretPropertiesFile, masterKeyReaderFile .
- Then open the terminal and navigate to `ballerina-sp-tracing/guide` and run Ballerina project initializing toolkit.

  ``
     $ ballerina init
  ``
  
  

> - Also you need to clone and build the ballerina-sp-extension in the following repository [https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-observability](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-observability) 

Reviewer: Shall we give the link to the sp-extension in this repo?

Author: Noted. I will update it.

                }
                error er => {
                    io:println(er.message);
                }
            }

            updateStatus = { "Status": "Data Inserted Successfully", "id": uid };
        }
        error err => {
            updateStatus = { "Status": "Data Not Inserted", "Error": err.message };
        }
    }
    return updateStatus;
}

// Function to delete student data from database.
# `deleteData()` is a function to delete a student's data from student records database.
# + stuId - This is the id of the student to be deleted.
# + return - This function returns a json object. If data is deleted it returns json containing a status.
#              If data is not deleted , it returns the json containing a status and error message.

public function deleteData(int stuId) returns (json) {
    json status = {};
    string sqlString = "DELETE FROM student WHERE id = ?";

    // Delete existing data by invoking update action.
    var ret = testDB->update(sqlString, stuId);
    io:println(ret);
    match ret {
        int updateRowCount => {
            if (updateRowCount != 1){
                status = { "Status": "Data Not Found" };
            }

>             else {

Reviewer 2: Shall we merge this with the previous line?

endpoint http:Listener listener {
    port: 9191
};

// Marks data service.
@http:ServiceConfig {
    basePath: "/marks"
}
service<http:Service> MarksData bind listener {
    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods:["GET"],
        path: "/getMarks/{stuId}"
    }
    // Get marks resource used to get student's marks.
    getMarks(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request, int stuId) {
        http:Response response = new;
        json result = findMarks(untaint stuId);
        // Pass the obtained json object to the requested client.
        response.setJsonPayload(untaint result);
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response);
    }
}

# `findMarks()` is a function to find a student's marks from the marks record database.
#  + stuId -  This is the id of the student.
# + return - This function returns a json object. If data is added it returns json containing a status and id of student added.
#          If data is not added , it returns the json containing a status and error message.

public function findMarks(int stuId) returns (json) {
    json status = {};
    string sqlString = "SELECT * FROM marks WHERE student_Id = " + stuId;
    // Getting student marks of the given ID.

>     //Invoking select operation in testDB

Reviewer 2: No space after `//` and full stop at the end. Fix in all places.

                 // Get student name, age mobile number, address.
                 var name = io:readln("Enter Student name: ");
                 var age = io:readln("Enter Student age: ");
                 var mobile = io:readln("Enter mobile number: ");
                 var add = io:readln("Enter Student address: ");
             
                 // Create the request as json message.
                 json jsonMsg = { "name": name, "age": check <int>age, "mobNo": check <int>mobile, "address": add };
                 req.setJsonPayload(jsonMsg);
             
                 // Send the request to students service and get the response from it.
                 var resp = studentData->post("/records/addStudent", req);
                 match resp {
                     http:Response response => {
                         var msg = response.getJsonPayload();
                         //obtaining the result from the response received
                         match msg {
                             json jsonPL => {
                                 string message = "Status: " + jsonPL["Status"] .toString() + " Added Student Id :- " +

>                                      jsonPL["id"].toString();

Reviewer 2: Formatting issue?

                 match requ {
                     http:Response response => {
                         var msg = response.getJsonPayload();
                         // Obtaining the result from the response received.
                         match msg {
                             json jsonPL => {
                                 string message;
                                 // Validate to check if records are available.
                                 if (lengthof jsonPL >= 1) {
                                     int i;
                                     io:println();
                                     // Loop through the received json array and display data.
                                     while (i < lengthof jsonPL) {
                                         message = "Student Name: " + jsonPL[i]["name"] .toString() + ", " + " Student Age: " + jsonPL[i]["age"] .toString();
                                         io:println(message);
                                         i++;
                                     }
                                     io:println();
                                 }

>                                  else {

Reviewer 2: Else can be merged with the previous line. Please fix in all places.

 
    message-tracing-with-stream-processor
           └── guide
                ├── students
                │   ├── student_management_service.bal
                │   ├── student_marks_management_service.bal
                ├── client_service
                |         └── client_main.bal
                └── ballerina.conf
        

1. Create the above directories in your local machine, along with the empty `.bal` files.

2. Add the following lines in your [ballerina.conf](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/blob/master/ballerina.conf).

```toml
[b7a.observability.tracing]
enabled=true
name="wso2sp"

[b7a.observability.tracing.wso2sp]
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.type="thrift"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.username="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.password="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.url="tcp://localhost:7611"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.authUrl="ssl://localhost:7711"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.databridge.agent.config="<SET ABSOLUTE PATH>/data.agent.config.yaml"
javax.net.ssl.trustStore="<SET ABSOLUTE PATH>/wso2carbon.jks"
javax.net.ssl.trustStorePassword="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.service.name="ballerina_hello_world"
```

> - In the ballerina.conf file, the absolute path has to be set for the databridge agent config yaml file and the wso2carbon.jks file in order to configure the databridge agent and the wso2carbon keystore.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In the ballerina.conf file, the absolute path has to be set for the databridge agent config YAML file and the wso2carbon.jks file in order to configure the databridge agent and the wso2carbon keystore.
```

Reviewer 3: Shall we explain why we are using a wso2carbon keystone here?

- Also update the [data.agent.config.yaml](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/blob/master/resources/main/resources/data.agent.config.yaml) file by including the absolute path of the [required files](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/tree/master/resources/main/resources) in the following fields. This is done for the purpose of configuring security keys for a secured data communication in data agent.
  - trustStorePath, keystoreLocation, secretPropertiesFile, masterKeyReaderFile .
  
- Then open the terminal and navigate to `message-tracing-with-stream-processor/guide` and run Ballerina project initializing toolkit in order to initialize this project as Ballerina project.

  ``
     $ ballerina init
  ``
- Also clone and build the ballerina-sp-extension in the following repository [https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-observability/tree/master/tracing-extensions/modules/ballerina-sp-extension](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-observability/tree/master/tracing-extensions/modules/ballerina-sp-extension)

> - After the build navigate to `ballerina-sp-extension/target/distribution/` and copy all the JAR files to your `bre/lib` folder in your ballerina distribution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- After the build, navigate to `ballerina-sp-extension/target/distribution/` and copy all the JAR files to your `bre/lib` folder in your Ballerina distribution.
```

> - Start WSO2 Stream Processor dashboard and worker.Set up [distributed message tracing.](https://docs.wso2.com/display/SP430/Distributed+Message+Tracer)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Start WSO2 Stream Processor dashboard and worker. Set up [distributed message tracing](https://docs.wso2.com/display/SP430/Distributed+Message+Tracer).
```

> - Use `admin` as username and password. Include the following for your business rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use `admin` as the username and password. Include the following for your business rules.
```

### Development of student and marks service with Stream Processor

Now let us look into the implementation of the student management service with observability.

##### student_management_service.bal

``` ballerina
// Copyright (c) 2018 WSO2 Inc. (http://www.wso2.org) All Rights Reserved.
//
// WSO2 Inc. licenses this file to you under the Apache License,
// Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except
// in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
// http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/log;
import ballerina/mysql;
import ballerina/observe;
import ballerina/runtime;

// Type Student is created to store details of a student.
type Student record {
    int id;
    int age;
    string name;
    int mobNo;
    string address;
};

> // End point for marks details client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// Endpoint for marks details client.
```

endpoint http:Client marksServiceEP {
    url: " http://localhost:9191"
};

// Endpoint for MySQL client.
public endpoint mysql:Client databaseEP {
    host: "localhost",
    port: 3306,
    name: "testdb",
    username: "root",
    password: "",
    poolOptions: { maximumPoolSize: 5 },
    dbOptions: { useSSL: false }
};

> // The port listener for the student services..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// The port listener for the student services.
```

endpoint http:Listener studentServiceListener {
    port: 9292
};

// Student data service.
@http:ServiceConfig {
    basePath: "/records"
}
service<http:Service> StudentData bind studentServiceListener {
    int errors = 0;
    int requestCounts = 0;

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["POST"],
        path: "/addStudent"
    }
    // Add Students resource used to add student records to the system.
    addStudents(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request) {
        // Initialize an empty HTTP response message.
        requestCounts += 1;
        http:Response response;

>         // Accepting the Json payload sent from a request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // Accepting the JSON payload sent from a request.
```

        json payloadJson = check request.getJsonPayload();

        //Converting the payload to Student type.
        Student studentDetails = check <Student>payloadJson;

        // Calling the function insertData to update database.
        json returnValue = insertData (studentDetails.name, studentDetails.age, studentDetails.mobNo, studentDetails.address);

        // Send the response back to the client with the returned JSON value from insertData function.
        response.setJsonPayload(returnValue);
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response) but { error e => log:printError("Error sending response", err = e)};

        // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default system span.
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("tot_requests", <string>requestCounts);
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>errors);
    }

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["POST"],
        path: "/viewAll"
    }

>     // View students resource is to get all the students details and send to the requested user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // View students resource is to get all the student's details and send them to the requested user.
```

    viewStudents(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request) {
        requestCounts += 1;
        int childSpanId = check observe:startSpan("Obtain details span");
        http:Response response;
        json status = {};

        int spanId2 = observe:startRootSpan("Database call span");
        var returnValue = databaseEP->select("SELECT * FROM student", Student, loadToMemory = true);
        //Sending a request to MySQL endpoint and getting a response with required data table.
        _ = observe:finishSpan(spanId2);
        // A table is declared with Student as its type.
        table<Student> dataTable;

>         // Match operator used to check if the response returned value with one of the types below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // Match operator used to check if the response returned value matches with one of the types below.
```

        match returnValue {
            table tableReturned => dataTable = tableReturned;
            error e => io:println("Select data from student table failed: "
                    + e.message);
        }

        // Student details displayed on server side for reference purpose.
        foreach row in dataTable {
            io:println("Student:" + row.id + "|" + row.name + "|" + row.age);
        }

        // Table is converted to JSON.
        var jsonConversionRet = <json>dataTable;
        match jsonConversionRet {
            json jsonResult => {
                status = jsonResult;
            }
            error e => {
                status = { "Status": "Data Not available", "Error": e.message };
            }
        }

>         // Sending back the converted json data to the request made to this service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // Sending back the converted JSON data to the request made to this service.
```

        response.setJsonPayload(untaint status);
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response) but { error e => log:printError("Error sending response", err = e) };

        _ = observe:finishSpan(childSpanId);
        // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default ootb system span.
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("tot_requests", <string>requestCounts);
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>errors);

    }

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["GET"],
        path: "/testError"
    }

>     // Test Error resource to make a mock error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Test Error resource is used to make a mock error.
```

    testError(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request) {
        requestCounts += 1;
        http:Response response;

        errors += 1;
        io:println(errors);
        // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default ootb system span.
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>errors);
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("tot_requests", <string>requestCounts);
        log:printError("error test");
        response.setTextPayload("Test Error made");
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response) but { error e => log:printError("Error sending response", err = e) };
    }

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["GET"],
        path: "/deleteStu/{stuId}"
    }
    // Delete Students resource for deleteing a student using id.
    deleteStudent(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request, int stuId) {
        requestCounts += 1;
        http:Response response;
        json status = {};

>         // Calling deleteData function with id as parameter and get a return JSON object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // Calling the deleteData function with id as the parameter and getting a return JSON object.
```

        var returnValue = deleteData(stuId);

        // Pass the obtained JSON object to the request.
        response.setJsonPayload(returnValue);
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response) but { error e => log:printError("Error sending response", err = e) };

>         // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default ootb system span.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default system span.
```

        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("tot_requests", <string>requestCounts);
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>errors);
    }

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["GET"],
        path: "/getMarks/{stuId}"
    }
    // Get marks resource for obtaining marks of a particular student.
    getMarks(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request, int stuId) {
        requestCounts += 1;
        http:Response response;
        json result;

>         // Self defined span for observability purposes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // Self-defined span for observability purposes.
```

        int firstSpan = check observe:startSpan("First span");

>         // Request made for obtaining marks of the student with the respective stuId to marks Service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        // Request made for obtaining marks of the student with the respective stuId to mark service.
```

        var requestReturn = marksServiceEP->get("/marks/getMarks/" + untaint stuId);

        match requestReturn {
            http:Response response2 => {
                var msg = response2.getJsonPayload();

>                 // Gets the Json object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                // Gets the JSON object.
```

                match msg {
                    json js => {
                        result = js;
                    }

                    error er => {
                        log:printError(er.message, err = er);
                    }
                }
            }
            error err => {
                log:printError(err.message, err = err);
            }
        }
        // Stopping the previously started span.
        _ = observe:finishSpan(firstSpan);

>         //Sending the Json to the client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        //Sending the JSON to the client.
```

        response.setJsonPayload(untaint result);
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response) but { error e => log:printError("Error sending response", err = e) };

>         //  The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default ootb system span.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        //  The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default system span.
```

        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("tot_requests", <string>requestCounts);
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>errors);
    }
}

> // Function to insert values to database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// Function to insert values to the database.
```

# `insertData()` is a function to add data to student records database.
#
# + name -  This is the name of the student to be added.
# + age -   Student age.
# + mobNo - Student mobile number.
# + address-Student address.
# + return -This function returns a JSON object. If data is added it returns JSON containing a status and id of student added.
#           If data is not added , it returns the JSON containing a status and error message.

public function insertData(string name, int age, int mobNo, string address) returns (json) {
    json updateStatus;
    int uid;
    string sqlString = "INSERT INTO student (name, age, mobNo, address) VALUES (?,?,?,?)";

>     // Insert data to SQL database by invoking update action.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Insert data to the SQL database by invoking the update action.
```

    var ret = databaseEP->update(sqlString, name, age, mobNo, address);

>     // Use match operator to check the validity of the result from database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Use match operator to check the validity of the result from the database.
```

    match ret {
        int updateRowCount => {
            var result = getId(untaint mobNo);

>             // Getting info of the student added

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            // Get the information of the student added.
```

            match result {
                table dataTable => {
                    while (dataTable.hasNext()) {
                        var ret2 = <Student>dataTable.getNext();
                        match ret2 {

>                             // Getting the  id of the latest student added.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                            // Getting the ID of the latest student added.
```

                            Student student => uid = student.id;
                            error e => io:println("Error in get employee from table: " + e.message);
                        }
                    }
                }
                error er => {
                    log:printError(er.message,err = er);
                }
            }
            updateStatus = { "Status": "Data Inserted Successfully", "id": uid };
        }
        error err => {
            updateStatus = { "Status": "Data Not Inserted", "Error": err.message };
        }
    }
    return updateStatus;
}

> // Function to delete student data from database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// Function to delete the student data from the database.
```

# `deleteData()` is a function to delete a student's data from student records database.
#
# + stuId -  This is the id of the student to be deleted.
# + return - This function returns a JSON object. If data is deleted it returns JSON containing a status.
#            If data is not deleted , it returns the JSON containing a status and error message.

public function deleteData(int stuId) returns (json) {
    json status = {};
    string sqlString = "DELETE FROM student WHERE id = ?";

>     // Delete existing data by invoking update action.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Delete the existing data by invoking the update action.
```

                    }
                    io:println("\n"+ message + "\n");
                }
                error err => {
                    log:printError(err.message, err = err);
                }
            }
        }
        error err => {
            log:printError(err.message, err = err);
        }
    }
}

```

- Now we have completed the implementation of student management service with marks management service.

## Testing 

### Invoking the student management service

You can start both the services by opening a terminal and navigating to `message-tracing-with-stream-processor/guide`, and execute the following command.

```
$ ballerina run --config <path-to-conf>/ballerina.conf students
```

- You need to start the WSO2 Stream Processor dashboard and worker and navigate to the portal page. Here again use `admin` for both the username and password.

 You can observe the service performance by making some http requests to the above services. This is made easy for you as 
 there is a client program implemented. You can start the client program by opening another terminal and navigating to message-tracing-with-stream-processor/guide
 and run the below command
 

>  ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 You can observe the service performance by making some HTTP requests to the above services. This is made easy for you as 
```

 $ ballerina run client_service
 ``` 
 
### Testing with Distributed Message Tracer.
 
#### Views of traces
 After making some HTTP requests, go to the distributed message tracing dashboard in your WSO2 Stream Processor portal.

 - You are expected to see the traces as below when you press the search button in the dashboard.
 
![SP](images/trace1.png "SP")
 

>  - To view a particular trace click on the trace row. And you will see as below

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - You are expected to see the following traces as indicated below when you press the search button in the dashboard.
```

 
![SP](images/trace2.png "SP")
    

>  - To view span details with metrics click on a particular span and you are expected to see as below

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - To view a particular trace, click on the trace row. You will see the following.
```

 
![SP](images/trace3.png "SP")

>  You can filter the received traces by providing the service names, time and/or resource names in the tracing search box.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 - To view span details with metrics, click on a particular span and you are expected to see the following.
```

 - Tracing search -
  

>  ![SP](images/trace6.png "SP")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 You can filter the received traces by providing the service names, time, and/or resource names in the tracing search box.
```

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor)

# Integration with WSO2 Stream Processor

> WSO2 stream processor provides us with distributed message tracing. The Distributed Message Tracer allows you to trace the events which are produced while ballerina services serve for requests. The ballerina services send these tracing data as WSO2 events.

Reviewer 3: Change lower case to title case for product names so that it reads as "WSO2 Stream Processor" and "Ballerina". Apply everywhere in this guide if applicable.

Also you would normally use "that" instead of "which" in this context. Normally "which" is used to add some additional information to a sentence and you would normally have a comma before "which".

I've also made some other minor modifications here. Shall we use something similar to the following:

"WSO2 Stream Processor (SP) enables you to perform distributed message tracing. The Distributed Message Tracer allows you to trace the events that are produced, while Ballerina services serve the requests. The Ballerina services send the tracing data as WSO2 events to WSO2 SP."

Author: Yes sure. I will make the necessary changes.

>   >This guide provides instructions on how Ballerina can be used to integrate with Stream-Processor Message Tracer.

Reviewer 3: Let's say "WSO2 Stream Processor" here.

> The following are the sections available in this guide.

Reviewer 3: Any reason why we don't have a section for Deployment and Observability? Normally we have those.

Author: The ultimate goal of this guide is to observe Ballerina services through SP Message Tracer. Therefore this guide is based on observability.  This is the reason to ignore the Observability section.
The testing part covers the Deployment section. Therefore Deployment section is not included.

- [What you'll build](#what-you’ll-build)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Testing with distributed message tracing](#testing-with-distributed-message-tracer.)
     - [Traces](#views-of-traces)

## What you’ll build
To perform this integration with Distributed Message Tracer, a real world use case of a very simple student management system is used.

> This system will illustrate the manipulation of student details in a school/college management system. The administrator will be able to perform the following actions in this service.

Reviewer 3: Let's avoid future tense wherever possible and use present tense. Normally the word will is indicative of future tense. Check for other occurrences of this In this guide.

So you would say, "This system illustrates.." and "The administrator is able..".

    - Add a student's details to the system.
    - List down all the student's details who are registered in the system.
    - Delete a student's details from the system by providing student ID.
    - Generate a mock error (for observability purposes).
    - Get a student's marks list by providing student ID.

> ![Honeycomb](images/ballerina-sp.svg "Ballerina-Honeycomb")

Reviewer 3: Can we add some description about this diagram so that what is being built is clear. Also it's good if we can explain what each component does at a high level.

> - **Make Requests** : To perform actions on student  management service, a console based client program has been written in Ballerina for your ease of making requests.

Reviewer 3: Remove extra spaces. Also put a dash between "console" and "based". Normally it is written as "console-based".

## Prerequisites
 

> - [Ballerina Distribution](https://ballerina.io/learn/getting-started/)

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we point to the Download page here?

- [MySQL](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/blob/master/resources/testdb.sql)

> - [WSO2 - Stream Processor v4.3.0 or above](https://github.com/wso2/product-sp/releases)

Reviewer 3: Any reason for pointing to the repo here? It might be easier for users if they are directed to the SP product page in wso2.com. Repo is also fine but they will have to build.

- A Text Editor or an IDE 

## Implementation

> If you want to skip the basics, you can download the GitHub repo and continue from the [Testing](#testing) section.

### Implementing database
 - Start MySQL server in your local machine.

>  - Create a database with name `testdb` in your MySQL localhost. If you want to skip the database implementation, then directly import the [testdb.sql](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/blob/master/resources/testdb.sql) file into your localhost. You can find it in the Github repo.

Reviewer 3: Change to "Create a database named..."

Change "Github" to "GitHub". Apply elsewhere if applicable,

### Create the project structure
        
 For the purpose of this guide, let's use the following package structure.
 
    message-tracing-with-stream-processor
           └── guide
                ├── students
                │   ├── student_management_service.bal
                │   ├── student_marks_management_service.bal
                ├── client_service
                |         └── client_main.bal
                └── ballerina.conf
        

- Create the above directories in your local machine, along with the empty `.bal` files.

> - You have to add the following lines in your [ballerina.conf](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/blob/master/ballerina.conf).

Reviewer 3: Let's just say "Add the following lines in..." here.

Also, shall we reformat this to be a numbered list?

```toml
[b7a.observability.tracing]
enabled=true
name="wso2sp"

[b7a.observability.tracing.wso2sp]
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.type="thrift"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.username="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.password="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.url="tcp://localhost:7611"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.authUrl="ssl://localhost:7711"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.databridge.agent.config="<SET ABSOLUTE PATH>/data.agent.config.yaml"
javax.net.ssl.trustStore="<SET ABSOLUTE PATH>/wso2carbon.jks"
javax.net.ssl.trustStorePassword="admin"
reporter.wso2sp.publisher.service.name="ballerina_hello_world"
```

> - In the ballerina.conf file for line number 11 and 12, you are required to give the appropriate absolute path to the following files mentioned in the lines.

Reviewer 3: Let's add the reason for doing this.

- You can find these files [here](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/tree/master/resources/main/resources).

> - Also you need to update the [data.agent.config.yaml](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/blob/master/resources/main/resources/data.agent.config.yaml) file by including the absolute path of the [required files](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/message-tracing-with-stream-processor/tree/master/resources/main/resources) in the following fields.

Reviewer 3: Add why we are doing this step.

  - trustStorePath, keystoreLocation, secretPropertiesFile, masterKeyReaderFile .

> - Then open the terminal and navigate to `message-tracing-with-stream-processor/guide` and run Ballerina project initializing toolkit.

Reviewer 3: Let's add why we need to do this.

  ``
     $ ballerina init
  ``
- Also you need to clone and build the ballerina-sp-extension in the following repository [https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-observability/tree/master/tracing-extensions/modules/ballerina-sp-extension](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-observability/tree/master/tracing-extensions/modules/ballerina-sp-extension)

> - After the build  navigate to `ballerina-sp-extension/target/distribution/` and copy all the jar files to your `bre/lib` folder in your ballerina distribution.

Reviewer 3: Remove extra spaces and change "jar" to "JAR" or ".jar".

> - Start WSO2 Stream Processor dashboard and worker. Set up  [distributed message tracing.](https://docs.wso2.com/display/SP420/Distributed+Message+Tracer)

Reviewer 3: There is an extra space here. Check the guide for more such occurances.

- Use `admin` as username and password. Include the following for your business rules.

    ```
    Span stream definition - @source(type='wso2event',  wso2.stream.id="SpanStream:1.0.0",  @map(type='wso2event')) define stream SpanStreamIn (componentName string, traceId  string, spanId long, baggage string, parentId long, operationName string, startMicros long, finishMicros long, tags string, references string);
    Service Name - componentName
    Operation Name - operationName
    Span ID -  convert(spanId, 'string')
    Trace ID - traceId
    Tags - tags
    Baggage Items - baggage
    Start Time - startMicros
    End Time - finishMicros
    Span References - references
    Parent ID - convert(parentId, 'string')
    Parent span is defined - true 
    ```
    

> - Leave the rest of the fields as default values for parent span.

Reviewer 3: It's unclear what you mean by "parent span" here. Can we explain more?

##### student_management_service.bal

``` ballerina
// Copyright (c) 2018 WSO2 Inc. (http://www.wso2.org) All Rights Reserved.
//
// WSO2 Inc. licenses this file to you under the Apache License,
// Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except
// in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
// http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
// software distributed under the License is distributed on an
// "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
// KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
// specific language governing permissions and limitations
// under the License.

import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/log;
import ballerina/mysql;
import ballerina/observe;
import ballerina/runtime;

// Type Student is created to store details of a student.
type Student record {
    int id;
    int age;
    string name;
    int mobNo;
    string address;
};

// End point for marks details client.
endpoint http:Client marksServiceEP {
    url: " http://localhost:9191"
};

> // Endpoint for mysql client.

Reviewer 3: Change "mysql" to "MySQL". Apply elsewhere if applicable.

public endpoint mysql:Client databaseEP {
    host: "localhost",
    port: 3306,
    name: "testdb",
    username: "root",
    password: "",
    poolOptions: { maximumPoolSize: 5 },
    dbOptions: { useSSL: false }
};

> // This service listener.

Reviewer 3: This won't be clear to a new user. Can we enhance this comment more?

endpoint http:Listener studentServiceListener {
    port: 9292
};

// Student data service.
@http:ServiceConfig {
    basePath: "/records"
}
service<http:Service> StudentData bind studentServiceListener {
    int errors = 0;
    int requestCounts = 0;

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["POST"],
        path: "/addStudent"
    }
    // Add Students resource used to add student records to the system.
    addStudents(endpoint httpConnection, http:Request request) {

>         // Initialize an empty http response message.

Reviewer 3: Change "http" to "HTTP".

        requestCounts++;
        http:Response response;

>         // Accepting the Json payload sent from a request.

Reviewer 3: Json -> JSON.

        json payloadJson = check request.getJsonPayload();

        //Converting the payload to Student type.
        Student studentData = check <Student>payloadJson;

        // Calling the function insertData to update database.
        json returnValue = insertData (studentData.name, studentData.age, studentData.mobNo, studentData.address);

        // Send the response back to the client with the returned json value from insertData function.
        response.setJsonPayload(returnValue);
        _ = httpConnection->respond(response) but { error e => log:printError("Error sending response", err = e)};

>         // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default ootb system span.

Reviewer 3: Remove "ootb". I think it's understandable when you say default.

        dbOptions: { useSSL: false }
    });

> 

Reviewer 4: Listener of the student service port.

> // Port listener for the student service.

Reviewer 4: Listener of the student service port.

> // Port listener for the student service.

Reviewer 4: Listener of the student service port.

listener http:Listener studentServiceListener = new(9292);

> // Service configuration for student data service.

Reviewer 4: Service configuration of the student data service.

        var result = caller->respond(response);
        if (result is error) {
            // Log the error for the service maintainers.

>             log:printError("Error sending response", err = result);

Reviewer 4: "Error in sending the response to the client."

        }
    }

>     // Resource configuration for viewing all the student's details in the system.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration for viewing details of all the students in the system.

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["POST"],
        path: "/viewAll"
    }

>     // View students resource is to get all the students details and send to the requested user.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration to get details of all the students and send to the requested user.

    resource function viewStudents(http:Caller caller, http:Request request) {
        studentData.requestCounts += 1;
        int|error childSpanId = observe:startSpan("Obtain details span");
        http:Response response = new;
        json status = {};
        int spanId2 = observe:startRootSpan("Database call span");

        //Sending a request to MySQL endpoint and getting a response with required data table.
        var returnValue = studentDB->select("SELECT * FROM student", Student, loadToMemory = true);
        _ = observe:finishSpan(spanId2);

        // A table is declared with Student as its type.
        table<Student> dataTable = table{};

        if (returnValue is error) {

>            log:printError("Error in fetching students data from the database", err = returnValue);

Reviewer 4: Error in fetching data of all the students from the database.

        // Table is converted to JSON.
        var jsonConversionValue = json.convert(dataTable);
        if (jsonConversionValue is error) {

>             log:printError("Error in converting the data table from database to JSON", err = jsonConversionValue);

Reviewer 4: Error in converting the data from a tabular format to JSON.

        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>studentData.errors);
    }

>     // Resource configuration for making a mock error to the system.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration for generating a mock error in the system for testing purposes.

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["GET"],
        path: "/testError"
    }

>     // Test Error resource to make a mock error.

Reviewer 4: Resource to generate a mock error for testing purposes.

    resource function testError(http:Caller caller, http:Request request) {
        studentData.requestCounts += 1;
        http:Response response = new;
        studentData.errors += 1;
        io:println(studentData.errors);

>         // The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default system span.

Reviewer 4: The below function adds tags to be passed as metrics in the message traces. These tags are added to the default system span.

        }
    }

>     // Resource configuration for deleting a students detail's from the system.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration for deleting the details of a student from the system.

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["GET"],
        path: "/deleteStu/{studentId}"
    }
    // Delete Students resource for deleteing a student using id.
    resource function deleteStudent(http:Caller caller, http:Request request, int studentId) {
        studentData.requestCounts += 1;
        http:Response response = new;
        json status = {};

>         // Calling deleteData function with id as parameter and get a return json object.

Reviewer 4: Calling the deleteData function with the studentId as the parameter and getting a JSON object returned.

        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>studentData.errors);
    }

>     // Resource configuration for getting marksa of a particular student.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration for getting the marks of a particular student.

        http:Response response = new;
        json result = {};

>         // Self defined span for observability purposes.

Reviewer 4: Self-defined span for observability purposes.

        int|error firstSpan = observe:startSpan("First span");
        // Request made for obtaining marks of the student with the respective studentId to marks Service.
        var requestReturn = marksServiceEP->get("/marks/getMarks/" + untaint studentId);
        if (requestReturn is error) {

>             log:printError("Error in fetching marks from the marks system", err = requestReturn);

Reviewer 4: Error in fetching marks from the system.

        } else {
            var msg = requestReturn.getJsonPayload();
            if (msg is error) {

>                 log:printError("Error in extracting JSON from the response", err = msg);

Reviewer 4: Error in extracting the JSON payload from the response.

        if (resResult is error) {
            log:printError("Error sending response", err = resResult);
        }

>         //  The below function adds tags that are to be passed as metrics in the traces. These tags are added to the default system span.

Reviewer 4: The below function adds tags to be passed as metrics in the message traces. These tags are added to the default system span.

        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("tot_requests", <string>studentData.requestCounts);
        _ = observe:addTagToSpan("error_counts", <string>studentData.errors);
    }
}

> // Function to insert values to database.

Reviewer 4: Function to insert values to the database.

    json updateStatus = { "Status": "Data Inserted " };
    int uniqueId = 0;
    string sqlString = "INSERT INTO student (name, age, mobNo, address) VALUES (?,?,?,?)";

>     // Insert data to SQL database by invoking update action.

Reviewer 4: Invoking the update action to insert data to the SQL database.

    var returnValue = studentDB->update(sqlString, name, age, mobNo, address);
    if (returnValue is int) {
        table<Student> result = getId(untaint mobNo);
        while (result.hasNext()) {
            var returnValue2 = result.getNext();
            if (returnValue2 is Student) {
                uniqueId = returnValue2.id;
            } else {

>                 log:printError("Error in obtaining student ID from the database", err = returnValue2);

Reviewer 4: Error in obtaining a student ID from the database for the added student.

        } else {
            updateStatus = { "Status": "Data Not inserted" };
        }
    } else {
        log:printError("Error in adding the data to the database", err = returnValue);
    }
    return updateStatus;
}

> # Function to delete student data from database.

Reviewer 4: Function to delete data of a student from the database.

    json status = {};
    string sqlString = "DELETE FROM student WHERE id = ?";

>     // Delete existing data by invoking update action.

Reviewer 4: Invoking an update action to delete existing data from the database.

    string sqlString = "SELECT * FROM student WHERE mobNo = ?";
    // Retrieve student data by invoking select remote function defined in ballerina sql client
    var returnValue = studentDB->select(sqlString, Student, mobNo);

    table<Student> dataTable = table{};
    if (returnValue is error) {

>         log:printError("Error obtaining student ID from the database", err = returnValue);

Reviewer 4: Error in obtaining the student ID from the database to retrieve the marks of the student.

    int science;
};

> // Port listener for marks service.

Reviewer 4: Listener for the port of the marks service.

listener http:Listener marksServiceListener = new(9191);

> // Service configuration marks service.

Reviewer 4: Service configuration of the marks service.

@http:ServiceConfig {
    basePath: "/marks"
}
service MarksData on marksServiceListener {

>     // Resource configuration for getting student's marks details from the system.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration for retrieving the marks of a student from the system.

>     // Resource configuration for getting student's marks details from the system.

Reviewer 4: Resource configuration for retrieving the marks of a student from the system.

    @http:ResourceConfig {
        methods: ["GET"],
        path: "/getMarks/{stuId}"
    }

>     // Resource used to get student's marks.

Reviewer 4: Resource to retrieve marks of a student from the system.

    // Getting student marks of the given ID.
    // Invoking select operation in testDB.
    var returnValue = studentDB->select(sqlString, Marks, loadToMemory = true);
    // Assigning data obtained from db to a table.
    table<Marks> dataTable = table {};
    if (returnValue is table<Marks>) {
        dataTable = returnValue;
    } else {

>         log:printError("Error in fetching data table from the database", err = returnValue);

Reviewer 4: Error in fetching the data table from the database.

        status = jsonConversionValue;
    } else {
        status = { "Status": "Data Not available" };

>         log:printError("Error in converting the data table to JSON", err = jsonConversionValue);

Reviewer 4: Error in converting the fetched data from tabular format to JSON.

import ballerina/io;
import ballerina/log;

> // Host name for the student administration system server.

Reviewer 4: Hostname of the server hosting the student administration system.

            io:println();
            continue;
        }
        var intOperation = int.convert(choice);
        if (intOperation is int) {
            io:println(intOperation);
            operation = intOperation;
        } else {

>             log:printError("Error in converting user selected option to int type", err = intOperation);

Reviewer 4: Error in converting the option selected by the user to int type.

    }
}

> // Function to check if an input is integer

Reviewer 4: Function to check if the input is an integer.

function isInteger(string input) returns boolean {
    string regEx = "\\d+";
    boolean|error isInt = input.matches(regEx);
    if (isInt is error) {

>         log:printError("Error in checking int type of " + input, err = isInt);

Reviewer 4: Error in checking if the type of the input variable is integer.

        return false;
    } else {
        return isInt;
    }

}

> // Function to add students to the database.

Reviewer 4: Function to add details of a student to the database.

        req.setJsonPayload(jsonMsg);

>     } else {

Reviewer 4: Error in adding details of the student to the database.

>         log:printError("Error in converting age and mobile number to int", err = ageAsInt);

Reviewer 4: Error in converting the age and the mobile number to integers.

        return;
    }

>     // Send the request to students service and get the response from it.

Reviewer 4: Sending the request to the students service and getting the response from it.

    var resp = studentService->post("/records/addStudent", req);

    if (resp is http:Response) {

>         // Extracting data from received JSON.

Reviewer 4: Extracting data from the received JSON object.

        var jsonMsg = resp.getJsonPayload();
        if (jsonMsg is json) {
            string message = "Status: " + jsonMsg["Status"] .toString() + " Added Student Id :- " +
                jsonMsg["id"].toString();
            io:println(message);
        } else {

>             log:printError("Error in extracting JSON from response", err = jsonMsg);

Reviewer 4: Error in extracting the JSON payload from the response.

        }

    } else {

>         log:printError("Error in obtained response", err = resp);

Reviewer 4: Error in the obtained response.

    }
}

> // Function to view all student's details.

Reviewer 4: Function to view details of all the students.

            }

        } else {

>             log:printError("Error in extracting JSON from response", err = jsonMsg);

Reviewer 4: Error in extracting the JSON payload from the response.

        }

    } else {

>         log:printError("Error in obtained response", err = resp);

Reviewer 4: Error in the obtained response.

    }
}

> // Function to delete a student's data from the system.

Reviewer 4: Function to delete data of a student from the system.

            string message = jsonMsg["Status"].toString();
            io:println("\n" + message + "\n");
        } else {

>             log:printError("Error in extracting JSON from response", err = jsonMsg);

Reviewer 4: Error in extracting the JSON payload from the response.

#### Views of traces
 After making some HTTP requests, go to the distributed message tracing dashboard in your WSO2 Stream Processor portal.

 - You are expected to see the traces as indicated below when you press the search button in the dashboard.
 
![SP](images/trace1.png "SP")
 

>  - To view a particular trace, click on the trace row. You will see the following.

Reviewer 4: To view a particular message trace, click on the row of it. You will view the following.

 
![SP](images/trace2.png "SP")
    

>  - To view span details with metrics, click on a particular span and you are expected to see the following.

Reviewer 4: To view span details with the metrics as shown below, click on a particular span.

 
![SP](images/trace3.png "SP")

>  You can filter the received traces by providing the service names, time, and/or resource names in the tracing search box.

Reviewer 4: To filter the received message traces, enter the service name, time, and/or resource name in the search box.
